
In recent decades, several new diseases have emerged in different geographical areas, with pathogens including Ebola virus, Zika virus, Nipah virus, and coronaviruses (CoVs). Recently, a new type of viral infection emerged in Wuhan City, China, and initial genomic sequencing data of this virus do not match with previously sequenced CoVs, suggesting a novel CoV strain (2019-nCoV), which has now been termed severe acute respiratory syndrome CoV-2 (SARS-CoV-2). Although coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is suspected to originate from an animal host (zoonotic origin) followed by human-to-human transmission, the possibility of other routes should not be ruled out. Compared to diseases caused by previously known human CoVs, COVID-19 shows less severe pathogenesis but higher transmission competence, as is evident from the continuously increasing number of confirmed cases globally. Compared to other emerging viruses, such as Ebola virus, avian H7N9, SARS-CoV, and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), SARS-CoV-2 has shown relatively low pathogenicity and moderate transmissibility. Codon usage studies suggest that this novel virus has been transferred from an animal source, such as bats. Early diagnosis by real-time PCR and next-generation sequencing has facilitated the identification of the pathogen at an early stage. Since no antiviral drug or vaccine exists to treat or prevent SARS-CoV-2, potential therapeutic strategies that are currently being evaluated predominantly stem from previous experience with treating SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and other emerging viral diseases. In this review, we address epidemiological, diagnostic, clinical, and therapeutic aspects, including perspectives of vaccines and preventive measures that have already been globally recommended to counter this pandemic virus.

KEYWORDS: COVID-19, emerging coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, diagnosis, One Health, therapy, vaccines

Over the past 2 decades, coronaviruses (CoVs) have been associated with significant disease outbreaks in East Asia and the Middle East. The severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) began to emerge in 2002 and 2012, respectively. Recently, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), causing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), emerged in late 2019, and it has posed a global health threat, causing an ongoing pandemic in many countries and territories (1).

Health workers worldwide are currently making efforts to control further disease outbreaks caused by the novel CoV (originally named 2019-nCoV), which was first identified in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China, on 12 December 2019. On 11 February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) announced the official designation for the current CoV-associated disease to be COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2. The primary cluster of patients was found to be connected with the Huanan South China Seafood Market in Wuhan (2). CoVs belong to the family Coronaviridae (subfamily Coronavirinae), the members of which infect a broad range of hosts, producing symptoms and diseases ranging from the common cold to severe and ultimately fatal illnesses, such as SARS, MERS, and, presently, COVID-19. SARS-CoV-2 is considered one of the seven members of the CoV family that infect humans (3), and it belongs to the same lineage of CoVs that causes SARS; however, this novel virus is genetically distinct. Until 2020, six CoVs were known to infect humans, including human CoV 229E (HCoV-229E), HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-HKU1, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV. Although SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have resulted in outbreaks with high mortality, others remain associated with mild upper-respiratory-tract illnesses (4).

Newly evolved CoVs pose a high threat to global public health. The current emergence of COVID-19 is the third CoV outbreak in humans over the past 2 decades (5). It is no coincidence that Fan et al. predicted potential SARS- or MERS-like CoV outbreaks in China following pathogen transmission from bats (6). COVID-19 emerged in China and spread rapidly throughout the country and, subsequently, to other countries. Due to the severity of this outbreak and the potential of spreading on an international scale, the WHO declared a global health emergency on 31 January 2020; subsequently, on 11 March 2020, they declared it a pandemic situation. At present, we are not in a position to effectively treat COVID-19, since neither approved vaccines nor specific antiviral drugs for treating human CoV infections are available (7,–9). Most nations are currently making efforts to prevent the further spreading of this potentially deadly virus by implementing preventive and control strategies.

In domestic animals, infections with CoVs are associated with a broad spectrum of pathological conditions. Apart from infectious bronchitis virus, canine respiratory CoV, and mouse hepatitis virus, CoVs are predominantly associated with gastrointestinal diseases (10). The emergence of novel CoVs may have become possible because of multiple CoVs being maintained in their natural host, which could have favored the probability of genetic recombination (10). High genetic diversity and the ability to infect multiple host species are a result of high-frequency mutations in CoVs, which occur due to the instability of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases along with higher rates of homologous RNA recombination (10, 11). Identifying the origin of SARS-CoV-2 and the pathogen’s evolution will be helpful for disease surveillance (12), development of new targeted drugs, and prevention of further epidemics (13). The most common symptoms associated with COVID-19 are fever, cough, dyspnea, expectoration, headache, and myalgia or fatigue.

In contrast, less common signs at the time of hospital admission include diarrhea, hemoptysis, and shortness of breath (14). Recently, individuals with asymptomatic infections were also suspected of transmitting infections, which further adds to the complexity of disease transmission dynamics in COVID-19 infections (1). Such efficient responses require in-depth knowledge regarding the virus, which currently is a novel agent; consequently, further studies are required.

Some therapeutic options for treating COVID-19 showed efficacy in in vitro studies; however, to date, these treatments have not undergone any randomized animal or human clinical trials, which limit their practical applicability in the current pandemic (7, 9, 19,–21).

The present comprehensive review describes the various features of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 causing the current disease outbreaks and advances in diagnosis and developing vaccines and therapeutics. It also provides a brief comparison with the earlier SARS and MERS CoVs, the veterinary perspective of CoVs and this emerging novel pathogen, and an evaluation of the zoonotic potential of similar CoVs to provide feasible One Health strategies for the management of this fatal virus (22,–367).

Coronaviruses are positive-sense RNA viruses having an extensive and promiscuous range of natural hosts and affect multiple systems (23, 24). Coronaviruses can cause clinical diseases in humans that may extend from the common cold to more severe respiratory diseases like SARS and MERS (17, 279). The recently emerging SARS-CoV-2 has wrought havoc in China and caused a pandemic situation in the worldwide population, leading to disease outbreaks that have not been controlled to date, although extensive efforts are being put in place to counter this virus (25). This virus has been proposed to be designated/named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), which determined the virus belongs to the Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus category and found this virus is related to SARS-CoVs (26). SARS-CoV-2 is a member of the order Nidovirales, family Coronaviridae, subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, which is subdivided into four genera, viz., Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus, Gammacoronavirus, and Deltacoronavirus (3, 27). The genera Alphacoronavirus and Betacoronavirus originate from bats, while Gammacoronavirus and Deltacoronavirus have evolved from bird and swine gene pools (24, 28, 29, 275).

Coronaviruses possess an unsegmented, single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome of around 30 kb, enclosed by a 5′-cap and 3′-poly(A) tail (30). The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is 29,891 bp long, with a G+C content of 38% (31). These viruses are encircled with an envelope containing viral nucleocapsid. The nucleocapsids in CoVs are arranged in helical symmetry, which reflects an atypical attribute in positive-sense RNA viruses (30). The electron micrographs of SARS-CoV-2 revealed a diverging spherical outline with some degree of pleomorphism, virion diameters varying from 60 to 140 nm, and distinct spikes of 9 to 12 nm, giving the virus the appearance of a solar corona (3). The CoV genome is arranged linearly as 5′-leader-UTR-replicase-structural genes (S-E-M-N)-3′ UTR-poly(A) (32). Accessory genes, such as 3a/b, 4a/b, and the hemagglutinin-esterase gene (HE), are also seen intermingled with the structural genes (30). SARS-CoV-2 has also been found to be arranged similarly and encodes several accessory proteins, although it lacks the HE, which is characteristic of some betacoronaviruses (31). The positive-sense genome of CoVs serves as the mRNA and is translated to polyprotein 1a/1ab (pp1a/1ab) (33). A replication-transcription complex (RTC) is formed in double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) by nonstructural proteins (nsps), encoded by the polyprotein gene (34). Subsequently, the RTC synthesizes a nested set of subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) via discontinuous transcription (35).

Based on molecular characterization, SARS-CoV-2 is considered a new Betacoronavirus belonging to the subgenus Sarbecovirus (3). A few other critical zoonotic viruses (MERS-related CoV and SARS-related CoV) belong to the same genus. However, SARS-CoV-2 was identified as a distinct virus based on the percent identity with other Betacoronavirus; conserved open reading frame 1a/b (ORF1a/b) is below 90% identity (3). An overall 80% nucleotide identity was observed between SARS-CoV-2 and the original SARS-CoV, along with 89% identity with ZC45 and ZXC21 SARS-related CoVs of bats (2, 31, 36). In addition, 82% identity has been observed between SARS-CoV-2 and human SARS-CoV Tor2 and human SARS-CoV BJ01 2003 (31). A sequence identity of only 51.8% was observed between MERS-related CoV and the recently emerged SARS-CoV-2 (37). Phylogenetic analysis of the structural genes also revealed that SARS-CoV-2 is closer to bat SARS-related CoV. Therefore, SARS-CoV-2 might have originated from bats, while other amplifier hosts might have played a role in disease transmission to humans (31). Of note, the other two zoonotic CoVs (MERS-related CoV and SARS-related CoV) also originated from bats (38, 39). Nevertheless, for SARS and MERS, civet cat and camels, respectively, act as amplifier hosts (40, 41).

Coronavirus genomes and subgenomes encode six ORFs (31). The majority of the 5′ end is occupied by ORF1a/b, which produces 16 nsps. The two polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab, are initially produced from ORF1a/b by a −1 frameshift between ORF1a and ORF1b (32). The virus-encoded proteases cleave polyproteins into individual nsps (main protease [Mpro], chymotrypsin-like protease [3CLpro], and papain-like proteases [PLPs]) (42). SARS-CoV-2 also encodes these nsps, and their functions have been elucidated recently (31). Remarkably, a difference between SARS-CoV-2 and other CoVs is the identification of a novel short putative protein within the ORF3 band, a secreted protein with an alpha helix and beta-sheet with six strands encoded by ORF8 (31).

Coronaviruses encode four major structural proteins, namely, spike (S), membrane (M), envelope (E), and nucleocapsid (N), which are described in detail below.

Coronavirus S protein is a large, multifunctional class I viral transmembrane protein. The size of this abundant S protein varies from 1,160 amino acids (IBV, infectious bronchitis virus, in poultry) to 1,400 amino acids (FCoV, feline coronavirus) (43). It lies in a trimer on the virion surface, giving the virion a corona or crown-like appearance. Functionally it is required for the entry of the infectious virion particles into the cell through interaction with various host cellular receptors (44).

Furthermore, it acts as a critical factor for tissue tropism and the determination of host range (45). Notably, S protein is one of the vital immunodominant proteins of CoVs capable of inducing host immune responses (45). The ectodomains in all CoVs S proteins have similar domain organizations, divided into two subunits, S1 and S2 (43). The first one, S1, helps in host receptor binding, while the second one, S2, accounts for fusion. The former (S1) is further divided into two subdomains, namely, the N-terminal domain (NTD) and C-terminal domain (CTD). Both of these subdomains act as receptor-binding domains, interacting efficiently with various host receptors (45). The S1 CTD contains the receptor-binding motif (RBM). In each coronavirus spike protein, the trimeric S1 locates itself on top of the trimeric S2 stalk (45). Recently, structural analyses of the S proteins of COVID-19 have revealed 27 amino acid substitutions within a 1,273-amino-acid stretch (16). Six substitutions are located in the RBD (amino acids 357 to 528), while four substitutions are in the RBM at the CTD of the S1 domain (16). Of note, no amino acid change is seen in the RBM, which binds directly to the angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) receptor in SARS-CoV (16, 46). At present, the main emphasis is knowing how many differences would be required to change the host tropism. Sequence comparison revealed 17 nonsynonymous changes between the early sequence of SARS-CoV-2 and the later isolates of SARS-CoV. The changes were found scattered over the genome of the virus, with nine substitutions in ORF1ab, ORF8 (4 substitutions), the spike gene (3 substitutions), and ORF7a (single substitution) (4). Notably, the same nonsynonymous changes were found in a familial cluster, indicating that the viral evolution happened during person-to-person transmission (4, 47). Such adaptive evolution events are frequent and constitute a constantly ongoing process once the virus spreads among new hosts (47). Even though no functional changes occur in the virus associated with this adaptive evolution, close monitoring of the viral mutations that occur during subsequent human-to-human transmission is warranted.

The M protein is the most abundant viral protein present in the virion particle, giving a definite shape to the viral envelope (48). It binds to the nucleocapsid and acts as a central organizer of coronavirus assembly (49). Coronavirus M proteins are highly diverse in amino acid contents but maintain overall structural similarity within different genera (50). The M protein has three transmembrane domains, flanked by a short amino terminus outside the virion and a long carboxy terminus inside the virion (50). Overall, the viral scaffold is maintained by M-M interaction. Of note, the M protein of SARS-CoV-2 does not have an amino acid substitution compared to that of SARS-CoV (16).

The coronavirus E protein is the most enigmatic and smallest of the major structural proteins (51). It plays a multifunctional role in the pathogenesis, assembly, and release of the virus (52). It is a small integral membrane polypeptide that acts as a viroporin (ion channel) (53). The inactivation or absence of this protein is related to the altered virulence of coronaviruses due to changes in morphology and tropism (54). The E protein consists of three domains, namely, a short hydrophilic amino terminal, a large hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and an efficient C-terminal domain (51). The SARS-CoV-2 E protein reveals a similar amino acid constitution without any substitution (16).

The N protein of coronavirus is multipurpose. Among several functions, it plays a role in complex formation with the viral genome, facilitates M protein interaction needed during virion assembly, and enhances the transcription efficiency of the virus (55, 56). It contains three highly conserved and distinct domains, namely, an NTD, an RNA-binding domain or a linker region (LKR), and a CTD (57). The NTD binds with the 3′ end of the viral genome, perhaps via electrostatic interactions, and is highly diverged both in length and sequence (58). The charged LKR is serine and arginine rich and is also known as the SR (serine and arginine) domain (59). The LKR is capable of direct interaction with in vitro RNA interaction and is responsible for cell signaling (60, 61). It also modulates the antiviral response of the host by working as an antagonist for interferon (IFN) and RNA interference (62). Compared to that of SARS-CoV, the N protein of SARS-CoV-2 possess five amino acid mutations, where two are in the intrinsically dispersed region (IDR; positions 25 and 26), one each in the NTD (position 103), LKR (position 217), and CTD (position 334) (16).

Besides the important structural proteins, the SARS-CoV-2 genome contains 15 nsps, nsp1 to nsp10 and nsp12 to nsp16, and 8 accessory proteins (3a, 3b, p6, 7a, 7b, 8b, 9b, and ORF14) (16). All these proteins play a specific role in viral replication (27). Unlike the accessory proteins of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2 does not contain 8a protein and has a longer 8b and shorter 3b protein (16). The nsp7, nsp13, envelope, matrix, and p6 and 8b accessory proteins have not been detected with any amino acid substitutions compared to the sequences of other coronaviruses (16).

We assessed the nucleotide percent similarity using the MegAlign software program, where the similarity between the novel SARS-CoV-2 isolates was in the range of 99.4% to 100%. Among the other Serbecovirus CoV sequences, the novel SARS-CoV-2 sequences revealed the highest similarity to bat-SL-CoV, with nucleotide percent identity ranges between 88.12 and 89.65%. Meanwhile, earlier reported SARS-CoVs showed 70.6 to 74.9% similarity to SARS-CoV-2 at the nucleotide level. Further, the nucleotide percent similarity was 55.4%, 45.5% to 47.9%, 46.2% to 46.6%, and 45.0% to 46.3% to the other four subgenera, namely, Hibecovirus, Nobecovirus, Merbecovirus, and Embecovirus, respectively. The percent similarity index of current outbreak isolates indicates a close relationship between SARS-CoV-2 isolates and bat-SL-CoV, indicating a common origin. However, particular pieces of evidence based on further complete genomic analysis of current isolates are necessary to draw any conclusions, although it was ascertained that the current novel SARS-CoV-2 isolates belong to the subgenus Sarbecovirus in the diverse range of betacoronaviruses. Their possible ancestor was hypothesized to be from bat CoV strains, wherein bats might have played a crucial role in harboring this class of viruses.

SplitsTree phylogeny analysis.
In the unrooted phylogenetic tree of different betacoronaviruses based on the S protein, virus sequences from different subgenera grouped into separate clusters. SARS-CoV-2 sequences from Wuhan and other countries exhibited a close relationship and appeared in a single cluster (Fig. 1). The CoVs from the subgenus Sarbecovirus appeared jointly in SplitsTree and divided into three subclusters, namely, SARS-CoV-2, bat-SARS-like-CoV (bat-SL-CoV), and SARS-CoV (Fig. 1). In the case of other subgenera, like Merbecovirus, all of the sequences grouped in a single cluster, whereas in Embecovirus, different species, comprised of canine respiratory CoVs, bovine CoVs, equine CoVs, and human CoV strain (OC43), grouped in a common cluster. Isolates in the subgenera Nobecovorus and Hibecovirus were found to be placed separately away from other reported SARS-CoVs but shared a bat origin.

This novel virus, SARS-CoV-2, comes under the subgenus Sarbecovirus of the Orthocoronavirinae subfamily and is entirely different from the viruses responsible for MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV (3). The newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 is a group 2B coronavirus (2). The genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 obtained from patients share 79.5% sequence similarity to the sequence of SARS-CoV (63).

As of 13 May 2020, a total of 4,170,424 confirmed cases of COVID-19 (with 287,399 deaths) have been reported in more than 210 affected countries worldwide (WHO Situation Report 114 [25]) (Fig. 3).

Initially, the epicenter of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic was China, which reported a significant number of deaths associated with COVID-19, with 84,458 laboratory-confirmed cases and 4,644 deaths as of 13 May 2020 (Fig. 4). As of 13 May 2020, SARS-CoV-2 confirmed cases have been reported in more than 210 countries apart from China (Fig. 3 and ​and4)4) (WHO Situation Report 114) (25, 64). COVID-19 has been reported on all continents except Antarctica. For many weeks, Italy was the focus of concerns regarding the large number of cases, with 221,216 cases and 30,911 deaths, but now, the United States is the country with the largest number of cases, 1,322,054, and 79,634 deaths. Now, the United Kingdom has even more cases (226,4671) and deaths (32,692) than Italy. A John Hopkins University web platform has provided daily updates on the basic epidemiology of the COVID-19 outbreak (https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6) (238).
